# REAL-TIME-DRIVER-DROWSINESS-ALERT-MECHANISM
we address a drowsy driver alert system that has been developed using such a technique in which the Video Stream Processing (VSP) and Facial Emotion Recognition (FER) is analyzed by facial expressions concept through night vision camera and Euclidean distance of the eye and nose. Face landmark algorithm is also used as a proper way to face detection. When the driver’s fatigue is detected, through camera, pulse sensor and vibration sensor the IoT module issues a warning message along with impact of collision and location information, thereby alerting with the help of alarm through the Arduino monitoring system.
1. Introduction
Unconscious driving state is one of the core reasons for road accident. Several people loss their life due to Hypnic jerks during driving. Various models are designed to alert driver during fatigue state, still there are multiple loopholes to efficiently develop smart driver drowsiness mechanism. Among many other issues of road accidents, drowsiness is one of the major facts which should be brought into consideration. 1.3 million Deaths occurred due to this indistinct fact each year. There are millions of crashes, serious accidents occurred due to this unclear fact. Drowsiness is not just to make driver sleepy; it makes him approximately impossible to stay alert. Drowsiness usually occurs due to lack of rest, under medication and sometimes destination is too far away. So due to this fact, driver show slow reaction to control his vehicle and can cause serious damage.
There are many methods/techniques which are already implemented to detect the drowsiness of driver while driving or in real time. Basically, there are two types of approaches used to detect driver’s fatigue. One’s can detect from body measurements like ECG or EMG. And the others can detect without focusing on body like SDLP (Standard Deviation of Lane Position). The advantage of first type is to get nearer to correct parameters.
Various models are designed to alert the driver during fatigue state, still there are multiple loopholes to efficiently develop smart driver drowsiness mechanism. However, in this project we are targeting multiple input parameters such as human pulse rate, facial landmark detector for effectively recognize drowsiness state. As, human pulse rate and eye-opening/closing ratio is tremendously affected in fatigue condition. Moreover, this module will compute results in real time environment and making effective decisions.
According to some drawbacks/disadvantages of previous methods/techniques, we proposed our method which is behavioral. Real time driver drowsiness alert mechanism (RTDDAM) is a real time hardware-based system which provides smart solution to avoid drowsiness while driving. This system is convenient solution to keep drivers alert by taking real time decisions and prevent road accidents. So due to this system ultimately death ratio reduced due to drowsiness.
This system would be installed on driver’s vehicles and detects hypnic jerks, yawns throughout the eye glances and continuous rotation of the head to produce alert and turn the unconscious state of driver to conscious driving.
3
2 Problem Statement
An IoT-based system is designed to avoid countless mishaps due to drowsy drivers’ behavioral and psychological changes by focusing on driver’s facial movements. In addition to monitoring the intensity of the collisions impacts during road accidents, it is also required to keep records of the location for taking supportive action.
3 Objectives
➢ To extract real time driver fatigue features.
➢ To generate/develop alarm during driver’s drowsiness.
➢ To propose smart driver drowsiness handling module during Hypnic jerks.
➢ To maintain brief history of driver drowsiness via GSM.
➢ To merge visual and non-visual modules through Arduino Control system.
